the Situation Room with Wolf Blitzer
weekdays for Eastern a lot of
speculation going on right now so we do
have to have some caution and care of
what we're reporting here but what Air
France officials are saying is that
there was turbulence in that area that
electrical problems were reported that
points to some possibilities for what
could have gone wrong but there's also
the possibility that we may never find
out a massive air and sea search that
may never provide definite answers on
the fate of flight 447 Air France
officials say the plane experienced
turbulence and electrical problems
before it vanished experts say a
lightning strike is a possibility but on
average every airline are struck at
least once a year by a lightning strike
they don't go down experts say when
lightning strikes a plane the bolt
typically hits a sharp part of it a
wingtip or a tail surface millions of
amps of energy run through the aircraft
and usually exit out another sharp point
but sometimes if components aren't well
grounded high voltages can cause
electrical damage this plane and Airbus
330 is equipped with a fly-by-wire
system unlike standard aircraft where
the pilots controls are manually
attached to control surfaces like
rudders and flaps with fly-by-wire the
pilots controls in the cockpit are
linked to the moveable surfaces by
electrical wires and computers so
essentially a signal is sent to move
those devices experts say there are
backup fly-by-wire computers and wires
but a lightning strike could possibly
disable those as well if you have it a
massive electrical problem it's possible
that you could cut off all the commands
out to the control surfaces still even
if those commands are cut off aviation
experts say the a330 has a manual flight
control system so-called trim tabs that
allow the crew to manipulate the rudder
and the surface controls we asked Airbus
for a briefing on possible causes on the
electrical warning system what
protections are built in for lightning
strikes and Airbus spokeswoman said it's
way too early at this stage and the
company does not want to engage in
speculation what about the weather in
the region over the Atlantic I
understand that could have been a real
problem that's right this is an area
called the Intertropical Convergence
zone we're going to show this to viewers
now this is the
area of the Atlantic where the northern
hemisphere meets the southern right
around the equator whether an aviation
experts tell us this is where the
northeast and southeast trade winds meet
pushing a lot of warm moist air upward
that condenses produces some of the
world's most nasty thunder storms and
hurricanes if lightning hit this plane
it could have been in this area wolf but
again very preliminary at this stage